Readme.md, before:

# Introduction

This is the new IPython based Narrative Interface repo.
The previous version has been branched into the pre-sprint branch for archival purposes.
All relevant code has been migrated under the src/ directory. A virtualenv based installer
and standard KBase makefile targets are in the works.

# Running

The ipython narrative is a "profile" of the ipython notebook. The setup and instructions are run using the Python [virtualenv](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv) module. If you haven't ever used this module, you should take some time to go familiarize yourself with it now.

## Current instructions

For the impatient, the following commands should work to start the KBase notebook.

    ./install.sh
    source narrative-venv/bin/activate
    profile_name=narrative run_notebook.sh notebook

That will run the KBase narrative version of the notebook (via the profile_name variable). If you do not set profile_name, then a base IPython Notebook will be started up with no KBase specific code - all KBase code is contained in the narrative profile so that we do not need to fork/branch the base IPython.

Now we will describe these commands step-by-step, and show how you can integrate with an existing set of Python virtual environments.

**Step 1**

    ./install.sh

This script creates a new Python virtual environment (see virtualenv). It takes command-line options controlling the destination of that virtual environment and the name of the environment itself. For example, to put the virtual environment under `~/.virtualenvs` (a common place to keep them) and to call it `kbase-narr`, you would instead run this variation on the `install.sh` command:

    ./install.sh -p ~/.virtualenvs -v kbase-narr 

**Step 2**

    source narrative-venv/bin/activate

This line activates the virtual environment. If you use the [virtualenvwrapper](http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/) module, and have installed the notebook under your usual virtual environment location, you can also simply use `workon <name>`, where `<name>` is whatever you chose to call the environment.

**Step 3**

    profile_name=narrative run_notebook.sh notebook

Finally, `run_notebook.sh` sets up some environment variables and runs ipython in "notebook" mode with the profile specified in profile_name ("narrative"). The notebooks themselves (i.e. files ending in `.ipynb`) are stored in `~/.narrative`. 

Last updated: Steve Chan (sychan) 9/2/2013
Last updated: Dan Gunter (dang) 8/19/2013

Commit message:

Added in reference to the python pip dependencies file in the bootstrap

Readme.md, after:

# Introduction

This is the new IPython based Narrative Interface repo.
The previous version has been branched into the pre-sprint branch for archival purposes.
All relevant code has been migrated under the src/ directory. A virtualenv based installer
and standard KBase makefile targets are in the works.

# Running

The ipython narrative is a "profile" of the ipython notebook. The setup and instructions are run using the Python [virtualenv](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv) module. If you haven't ever used this module, you should take some time to go familiarize yourself with it now.

All the python dependencies for the notebook are in the bootstrap module under bootstrap/kb_python_runtime/python-pip-list-narrative. If you get that file and run "pip install -r python-pip-list-narrative" it should install all the necessary python module dependencies to run the notebook.

## Current instructions

For the impatient, the following commands should work to start the KBase notebook.

    ./install.sh
    source narrative-venv/bin/activate
    profile_name=narrative run_notebook.sh notebook

That will run the KBase narrative version of the notebook (via the profile_name variable). If you do not set profile_name, then a base IPython Notebook will be started up with no KBase specific code - all KBase code is contained in the narrative profile so that we do not need to fork/branch the base IPython.

Now we will describe these commands step-by-step, and show how you can integrate with an existing set of Python virtual environments.

**Step 1**

    ./install.sh

This script creates a new Python virtual environment (see virtualenv). It takes command-line options controlling the destination of that virtual environment and the name of the environment itself. For example, to put the virtual environment under `~/.virtualenvs` (a common place to keep them) and to call it `kbase-narr`, you would instead run this variation on the `install.sh` command:

    ./install.sh -p ~/.virtualenvs -v kbase-narr 

**Step 2**

    source narrative-venv/bin/activate

This line activates the virtual environment. If you use the [virtualenvwrapper](http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/) module, and have installed the notebook under your usual virtual environment location, you can also simply use `workon <name>`, where `<name>` is whatever you chose to call the environment.

**Step 3**

    profile_name=narrative run_notebook.sh notebook

Finally, `run_notebook.sh` sets up some environment variables and runs ipython in "notebook" mode with the profile specified in profile_name ("narrative"). The notebooks themselves (i.e. files ending in `.ipynb`) are stored in `~/.narrative`. 

Last updated: Steve Chan (sychan) 9/2/2013
Last updated: Dan Gunter (dang) 8/19/2013
